# Getting started

The bacpac pipeline is designed as a rapid and portable workflow to process ONT long-read sequencing data for the purpose of pond-side detection of bacterial pathogens for sustainable aquaculture.

The pipeline is designed using Nextflow and utilises common, well-tested tools for bacterial genome and plasmid assembly, quality control, DNA contamination detection, and antibiotic resistance gene annotation.

## Software requirements

At a minimum, you will require the following installed on your system:

- Java version 17 or later
- Nextflow version 24 or later
    - See the [Nextflow docs](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/install.html) for information on installing both Nextflow and Java
- Singularity

The workflow has been designed to primarily run on NCI's [gadi](https://nci.org.au/our-systems/hpc-systems) high performance computing infrastructure.

## Pre-downloading the Kraken2 database

We recommend pre-downloading a Kraken2 database as it can be quite slow to download as part of the pipeline. You can find links to these databases [here](https://benlangmead.github.io/aws-indexes/k2). We have tested this pipeline with the [Standard Kraken2 database from 12 January 2024](https://genome-idx.s3.amazonaws.com/kraken/k2_standard_20240112.tar.gz).

## Sequencing summary

ONT sequencing runs will generate a sequencing summary text file, named something like `sequencing_summary_*.txt`. This file is used by multiple quality control steps of the pipeline and must be supplied with the `--sequencing_summary` parameter.

## Running the workflow

The pipeline takes either a sequencing data directory or a CSV samplesheet as its input.

A sequencing data directory should contain FASTQs for one or more samples, with each sample's FASTQs either organised into a separate subdirectory or compressed as a `.zip` file. Each sample may have multiple FASTQ files associated with it. For example, in the following example, the sequencing directory `/example/sequencing/directory` contains the data for `barcode01` and `barocde02` within subdirectories, and `barcode03` and `barcode04` as `.zip` files:

```bash
tree /example/sequencing/directory
```

```console
/example/sequencing/directory
├── barcode01
│   ├── FAX12345_pass_barcode01_6789abcd_ef012345_0.fastq.gz
│   └── FAX12345_pass_barcode01_6789abcd_ef012345_1.fastq.gz
├── barcode02
│   ├── FAX23456_pass_barcode01_789abcde_f0123456_0.fastq.gz
│   └── FAX23456_pass_barcode01_789abcde_f0123456_1.fastq.gz
├── barcode03.zip
└── barcode04.zip
```

You can specify to process all the samples within a directory like this with the `--input_directory` parameter:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf --input_directory /path/to/dataset [...]
```

If a samplesheet is provided, it should be formatted as follows:

```csv
barcode,batch,file_path
barcode01,batch1,/path/to/dataset/barcode01
barcode02,batch1,/path/to/dataset/barcode02
barcode03,batch2,/path/to/dataset/barcode03.zip
barcode04,batch2,/path/to/dataset/barcode04.zip
```

In this case, the path to the directory or `.zip` file containing a sample's FASTQs is provided under the `file_path` column.

To use a samplesheet, you can use the `--samplesheet` parameter:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf --samplesheet /path/to/samplesheet.csv [...]
```

The sequencing summary file should be supplied with:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf --sequencing_summary /path/to/sequencing_summary.txt [...]
```

If supplying a pre-downloaded Kraken2 database, use the `--kraken2_db` parameter to provide the directory containing the database files (i.e. `hash.k2d`, `ktaxonomy.tsv`, `opts.k2d`, and `taxo.k2d`):

```bash
nextflow run main.nf --kraken2_db /path/to/kraken2/db [...]
```

### Execution on gadi

If running on NCI's gadi, you will also need to provide the following paramters:

- `--gadi_account <PROJ>`
    - `PROJ` should be your NCI project ID, e.g. `ab01`
- `--gadi_storage <STORAGE_STRING>`
    - `STORAGE_STRING` should be a `+`-delimited list of NCI storage systems that you will require, e.g. `scratch/ab01` or `scratch/ab01+gdata/ab01`

You will also need to specify to use the `gadi` Nextflow profile, e.g.:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf -profile gadi [...]
```
For detailed instructions on scaling up the pipeline on Gadi, see [docs/gadi-execution.md](docs/gadi-execution.md).

### Accuracy mode

The pipeline expects by default that your samples have been called with fast basecalling - a quick but low-accuracy mode provided by Nanopore. If you have run basecalling with higher accuracy, you should also enable the `high_accuracy` profile to ensure the genome assembly steps have enough resources to complete successfully:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf -profile gadi,high_accuracy [...]
```

### Consensus assembly method

Previous versions of this pipeline used an automated [Trycycler](https://github.com/rrwick/Trycycler) workflow to take the assemblies generated by Flye and Unicycler and create a consensus sequence.

Since then, a newer, fully-automated tool has been developed by the same author, [Autocycler](https://github.com/rrwick/Autocycler). Our tests have shown this to be superior to the Trycycler method and we strongly recommend using Autocycler. As such, this is now the default consensus assembly method used in this pipeline.

If you wish, you can still use the Trycycler method by supplying the `--consensus_method trycycler` parameter:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf --consensus_method trycycler [...]
```

#### Subsampling

Both Trycycler and Autocycler support subsampling your reads prior to assembly and consensus generation. This can improve the clustering step and improve the accuracy of your consensus sequence. By default, the pipeline is set to use 4 subsamples with both Trycycler and Autocycler. You can change this value with the `--subsamples` parameter:

```bash
# Trycycler
nextflow run main.nf --consensus_method trycycler --subsamples 8 [...]

# Autocycler
nextflow run main.nf --subsamples 8 [...]
```

For Trycycler, you can disable subsampling altogether by using `--subsamples 1`. Subsampling is required for the Autocycler implementation and cannot be turned off.

#### Consensus assembly failures

In some cases, such as samples with low coverage or high fragmentation, the consensus assembly method may fail. In these cases, the pipeline will fall back to using one of the de novo assembly methods (currently either Unicycler or Flye). If this occurs, a message will be printed to the terminal and/or standard output where the pipeline is running, and a table of failed samples will appear at the top of the MultiQC reports.

When generating a consensus sequence with autocycler, one of the causes of such a failure is if the mean number of contigs per assembly exceeds a set value. This threshold is `25` by default, but can be changed by providing the `--max_contigs` parameter when running Nextflow:

```bash
nextflow run main --max_contigs 50 [...]
```

Note that this may fix the issue in some cases, but for highly fragmented assemblies, autocycler may still fail to generate a consensus sequence.

### Putting it together

A typical run might look like the following. Assuming a run on gadi, with a pre-downloaded Kraken2 database at `/scratch/ab01/kraken_db`, a samplesheet at `/scratch/ab01/samplesheet.csv`, a sequencing summary file at `/scratch/ab01/dataset/sequencing_summary.txt`, and high-accuracy basecalling, we would do the following:

```bash
module load nextflow/24.04.1
module load singularity

nextflow run main.nf \
    --samplesheet /scratch/ab01/samplesheet.csv \
    --kraken2_db /scratch/ab01/kraken_db \
    --sequencing_summary /scratch/ab01/dataset/sequencing_summary.txt \
    --gadi_account ab01 \
    --gadi_storage scratch/ab01 \
    -profile gadi,high_accuracy \
    -resume
```

## Outputs

By default, the pipeline will output all results to the `results/` directory. This can be changed by supplying the `--outdir` parameter, e.g.:

```bash
nextflow run main.nf --outdir 2025-06-01_results [...]
```

The output directory will contain the following sub-directories:

- `assemblies`: Your completed genome assemblies.
- `quality_control`: Quality information assessed by QUAST, BUSCO, Kraken2, PycoQC, and NanoPlot.
- `annotations`: Annotations for antimicrobial resistance genes, virulence genes, plasmid annotations, and bacterial genome annotations.
- `taxonomy`: Phylogenetic tree information.
- `report`: MultiQC reports summarising the pipeline run.

For detailed information about interpreting the pipeline results, see [docs/interpreting-results.md](docs/interpreting-results.md)

## Next steps

This pipeline has been primarily developed for use on NCI's gadi. For more information about running the pipeline at scale on that system, see [docs/gadi-execution.md](docs/gadi-execution.md).